Backward Compatibility Promise (#14694)
friendica/friendica: doc/Developers-Intro.md

* iOS: *currently no client*
* SailfishOS: **Friendiy** [src](https://kirgroup.com/projects/fabrixxm/harbour-friendly) - developed by [Fabio](https://kirgroup.com/profile/fabrixxm/profile)
* Windows: **Friendica Mobile** for Windows versions [before 8.1](http://windowsphone.com/s?appid=e3257730-c9cf-4935-9620-5261e3505c67) and [Windows 10](https://www.microsoft.com/store/apps/9nblggh0fhmn) - developed by [Gerhard Seeber](http://mozartweg.dyndns.org/friendica/profile/gerhard/profile)

## Backward compatability

### Backward Compatibility Promise

Friendica can be extended by addons. These addons relies on many internal classes and conventions. As developers our work on Friendica should not break things in the addons without giving the addon maintainers a chance to fix their addons. Our goal is to build trust for the addon maintainers but also allow Friendica developers to move on. This is called the Backward Compatibility Promise.

> We promise BC inside every major release. If one release breaks BC, this should considered as a bug and will be fix in a bugfix release.

Author: ```suggestion
We promise BC for deprecated code for at least 6 month. After this time the deprecated code will be remove with the next release. If a release breaks BC without deprecation, this SHOULD considered as a bug and BC SHOULD be restored in a bugfix release.
```

Reviewer: As we don't really have "major" releases but try to have one every three month I would put a fixed time frame into the deprecation warning (will be deprecated by the end of 2025) with a date that is at least 6 month (should be two stable releases) ahead.

Author: > As we don't really have "major" releases but try to have one every three month 

That's a relevant information. Is this documented somewhere? If not we should add it in the docs as well. What are the "official" releases and "bugfix" releases (git commits) called?

> I would put a fixed time frame into the deprecation warning (will be deprecated by the end of 2025) with a date that is at least 6 month (should be two stable releases) ahead.

I recommend to avoid dates in the deprecations because it is possible that a release is postponed or canceled and in this case we have to fix all the deprecation dates. I would prefer a way where we have only relative data.

If we want to keep BC for 2 releases I would add another step called "soft-deprecation" where we call `@trigger_error()` muted. This would allow a more decent way to trigger the errors. The 4 steps would be:

1. label code as deprecated using `@deprecated`
2. soft deprecation `@trigger_error('<old code> is deprecated since ??? and will be removed in two releases, use <new code> instead.', E_USER_DEPRECATED);`
3. hard deprecation by using `trigger_error('<old code> is deprecated since ??? and will be removed in the next release, use <new code> instead.', E_USER_DEPRECATED);`
4. remove hard deprecated code once the release of Friendica is published.

Reviewer: We try to do a release every 3 month (e.g. currently scheduled 2025.02, 2025.05, 2025.08 and 2025.11), approx 2 weeks before the release the release candidate is branched off from develop (when the core devs have the feeling it is stable) and every dev is asked to concentrate to bugfix on that branch, no new features allowed(TM). Also the RC branch is announced to the community so node admins on stable can install the RC to act as BETA testers [there are some brave doing ALPHA testing on the develop branch all the time]. And then, when all known issues we want to close for the RC are done it is released and merged back into develop.

But we don't follow the rule strictly. If something important happens we just screw it up and reschedule.

Author: Ok, thank you. The aspect that this timeline is not followed strictly is important for open source projects. That's the reason I would like to avoid absolute dates in deprecation notes.

I will change the PR to reflect the following statements:

1. After hard deprecation BC is promised for at least 6 month. The countdown will start as soon as the release has been published.
2. Deprecated code can also remain for more than 6 months, because it depends on when a release appears.

Inspired by the [Symonfy BC promise](https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/bc.html) we promise BC for every class, interface, trait, enum, function, constant, etc., but with the exception of:

- Classes, interfaces, traits, enums, functions, methods, properties and constants marked as `@internal` or `@private`
- Extending or modifying a `final` class or method in any way
- Calling `private` methods (via Reflection)

> - Accessing `private` propertyies (via Reflection)

Author: ```suggestion
- Accessing `private` properties (via Reflection)
```

- Accessing `private` methods (via Reflection)
- Accessing `private` constants (via Reflection)
- New properties on overrided `protected` methods
- Possible name collisions with new methods in an extended class (addon developers should prefix their custom methods in the extending classes in an appropriate way)
- Dropping support for every PHP version that has reached end of life

Breaking changes will be happen only in a new release but MUST be hard deprecated first.

### Deprecation and removing features

As the development goes by Friendica needs to get rid of old code and concepts. This will be done in 3 steps to give addon maintainer a chance to adjust their addons.

**1. Label deprecation**

If we as the Friendica maintainers decide to remove some functions, classes, interface, etc. we start this by adding a `@deprecated` PHPDoc note on the code. For instance the class `Friendica\Core\Logger` should be removed, so we add the following note with a possible replacement.

```php
/**
 * Logger functions
 *
 * @deprecated 2025.02 Use constructor injection or `DI::logger()` instead
 */
class Logger {/* ... */}
```

> This way addons developers might be notified by their IDE or other tools that the usage of the class is deprecated. In Friendica we can now start to replace all occurences and usage of this class with the alternative.

Author: ```suggestion
This way addon developers might be notified by their IDE or other tools that the usage of the class is deprecated. In Friendica we can now start to replace all occurrences and usage of this class with the alternative.
```

> The deprecation albel COULD be remain over multiple releases. As long as the deprecated code is used inside Friendica or the offical addon repository, it SHOULD NOT be hard deprecated.

Author: ```suggestion
The deprecation label COULD be remain over multiple releases. As long as the deprecated code is used inside Friendica or the official addon repository, it SHOULD NOT be hard deprecated.
```

**2. Hard deprecation**

> If the deprecated code is no longer used inside Friendica or the offical addons it MUST be hard deprecated. The code MUST NOT be deleted. It MUST be stay for at least to the next major release.

Author: ```suggestion
If the deprecated code is no longer used inside Friendica or the official addons it MUST be hard deprecated. The code MUST NOT be deleted. It MUST be stay for at least to the next major release.
```
